JUDY WOODRUFF: Now:
Electric cars, are they
the ride of the future?
Their potential to revolutionize
the road is once again
grabbing headlines, as some
companies ramp up
production plans.
William Brangham breaks down
the realities of the technology
and the market for electric
vehicles.
He recorded this earlier for our
weekly segment on the Leading
Edge of science and technology.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The knock on
electric cars has always been
that they're a pricey, niche
product that only a
handful of people would
want or could afford.
But that reputation is
starting to crumble, and fast.
The electric car maker Tesla,
which already has a bigger
market value than General Motors
and Ford, will soon
be delivering its
mid-priced Model 3 car.
Volvo just announced that,
in two years, all of its cars
will be hybrids or electric.
And some major U.S.
manufacturers have
proven electric vehicles
available right now.
So, are electric vehicles
ready to go mainstream?
NPR's Sonari Glinton has
been covering the story.
And he joins me now.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
SONARI GLINTON, NPR:
It's good to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, electric
car advocates have been saying
for decades that these cars
are the future.
Why has it taken them this long
to get to where they are today?
SONARI GLINTON: I would say low
gas prices, the pickup truck,
and America's sort of dependency
on the status quo.
When you look at an electric
car, if you drive one -- I used
to have a plug-in hybrid -- and
I got to a point where I
never went to the gas station,
and I never thought...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's
got to be a great feeling.
SONARI GLINTON: Yes, and
I never -- yes, exactly.
And I -- when I switched --
I'm one of the few people to
switch, you know, from electric
to a gas-powered car.
When I went to a gas-powered
car, it's a two-seater
convertible, so like
that's the reason I did
that.
But I cannot imagine getting
-- I can't imagine not
having that convenience.
You always start the
day with a full tank.
It's a simpler drivetrain,
so it's easier to fix.
It has fewer problems.
It's quiet like a luxury car.
The problem is, is that
the car companies, right,
are building trucks that...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
That the market wants.
SONARI GLINTON:
Desperately wants.
And people are buying
SUVs way more now than
they're buying cars.
The tipping point was
reached a few years ago.
And now we're at about 60
-- depending on what month,
about 60/40 SUVs to cars.
And that's partially because
we're all realizing, like,
I want to sit up higher.
I want to...
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And if the
gas prices aren't killing you,
there's no reason to go into
an electric.
SONARI GLINTON: Yes.
And, right now, to be
clear, there are a lot of
hurdles for electric cars.
And, mainly, it's the battery.
It's not necessarily figuring
out how to move the car.
It's getting a lighter,
cheaper battery is what's
at the crux of this.
So, the auto industry knows that
that's where it's going, right?
But Wall Street and customers
say, well, we like those F-150s,
we like those Chevy Silverados
and those Dodge Rams, and
we're buying a lot of them.
And they're hugely, hugely
profitable, while electric car
profits are, A, they're about
3.5 -- the volume
of electric cars...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A tiny
sliver of the market.
SONARI GLINTON: Tiny,
like less than 4 percent.
And it's been stagnant
for a few years because
of those gas prices.
So, there's a lot of things.
And, for the most part, in
many places in the country --
I live in California, where
there are many, many charging
stations and there's rebates
and things like that that
you can get.
But if you're in the middle
of the country, the word
may not have gotten to you.
You know, there are
so many hurdles.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
incentives just aren't there.
SONARI GLINTON: The
incentives aren't there.
And we haven't educated the
consumer about the difference.
If you -- when people get into
electric cars, they love them.
When they use them in their
lives, they love them.
But you look at the marketing
and you look at the car
companies, and your Super Bowl
half-time commercial isn't
necessarily, you know,
the latest, lightest,
most fuel-sipping
vehicle.
No, it's the big trucks
and those things.
And, right now, that's
important in the short term.
But every carmaker
understands that
electrification and autonomy
are definitely the future.
And they're not the future
like 30 years from now.
They're the future
really, really soon.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So
there are no Kodaks among
the car manufacturers.
They get that electric is
the future, but they're still
making a lot of money off big,
heavy trucks.
And is there an
incompatibility there?
Can you make electric cars
and design and develop and
push them out at the same time
that you're making big,
heavy, gas-guzzling trucks?
SONARI GLINTON: Well, you can
make the argument that companies
like Ford or Chevy are already
doing that.
Chevy has the Volt, which
does what the Tesla Model
3 says it's going to do.
It goes over 200
miles per charge.
It's under $40,000, which
is within range of the
average American consumer.
And then they build --
some months, the Silverado
is really, really a
gangbuster for that company.
But when we talk to executives,
you hear the pressure to keep
those trucks going, to pump
out those F-150 profits.
You know, studies show that,
for Ford, the F-150 is as much
as 90 percent sometimes of
profitability.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Wow.
SONARI GLINTON: So, you
look at the F-150...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's a
hard thing to argue against.
SONARI GLINTON: Hard
to argue against.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As I
mentioned, Tesla is about
to roll out this Model
3, which, obviously,
the big question for them is
that they have been selling a
very small number of very pricey
cars.
And now they want to sell a
lot of these cheaper cars to
appeal to a bigger audience.
What's the big
challenge for Tesla?
SONARI GLINTON: All the bets.
For Tesla, it's a bet inside
of a bet inside of a bet.
They're betting that more people
are going to buy electric cars.
They're betting on the battery
technology, which Tesla has
one of the biggest factories
in the world making batteries.
They also bet on how they're
going to change the way people
-- how they sell the cars.
I mean, you look all across
the board when it comes to
Tesla, there's this huge bet.
Right now, they make
4,400 cars a month or so.
And they're looking to
sell 500,000 Model 3's.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
It's a huge scale-up.
SONARI GLINTON: And, at the
end of the month, Tesla says
it is going to deliver 30 cars
to the buyers, and then
1,900, you know, later on.
The key is, how long are those
customers going to wait for that
car, and how long is it going
to take to get there, and they
are going to be able to scale
up, and can they keep that
quality that they were known for
when they were selling 4,400?
I don't know what the answer
to those things are, but I do
know that is going to be really
hard.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: NPR's Sonari
Glinton, thanks so much.
SONARI GLINTON:
Always a pleasure.